# Zoo Authentication System

by **Edwin Richards** 

This is an authentication/authorization system rewritten from IT-145 (Foundation in Application Development). The original requirements were: 
* Write an authentication system that gives a user three attempts to log in. 
* After three failed attempts, the program should display a warning and then close.
* Upon successful authentication, the program should display only the details allowed for the role assigned to the logged in user.
* The user should have to option to log out of the system to allow a new user to log in.

### Demo and Code Review

This Cap Stone project is supposed to address and enhance three main concepts from the original program:
* Software Design and Engineering
* Algorithms and Data Structures
* Databases

### Software Design and Engineering
  The artifact I selected is a Zoo Authentication program that I originally wrote for the course IT-145 (Foundation in Application Development). I submitted the final project for that course in August of 2017. For the final project in that course, we were given the choice between two projects. One option was an authentication system, the other was a monitoring system. I chose the prompt for the authentication system simply because I felt it was most practical. In today’s day and age, security is a imperative in virtually any application. Being able to protect data behind a login screen and then only display the amount of information allowed for the current user is an invaluable piece of knowledge for a software developer.
  When I took the course, I was already familiar with making event-driven, user interface applications. Even though the rubric specified a console app was all that was necessary, I wanted to challenge myself a little bit so I made a UI app with the Java Swing library. This helped to showcase my ability in developing real-world applications.
  For the category of Software Design and Engineering, I decided to convert the application from the original Java Swing UI into a Windows Presentation Foundation (WPF) app using C#.Net and incorporate an MVVM design pattern. 
  I chose WPF and MVVM because I am very familiar with the technology and concepts from work. But during the conversion into WPF, I learned how to make use of a content switcher control to change which view is being displayed within the same window. This is a different behavior than in my original application because in that one, I opened a new window rather than just changing the content. But the content switcher works wonderfully.

### Algorithms and Data Structures
  Something I learned about when I was originally writing the application in IT-145 was how passwords should be stored for authentication. Prior to the course, I knew passwords shouldn’t be stored in plain text because, well, it’s highly readable to anyone who can open the file. But I wasn’t sure what the standard encryption was. Turns out, most applications utilize the Message Digest 5 (MD5) hashing algorithm to hash passwords and then they store the hash for validation. The MD5 hash is a 16 byte (128-bit) one-way hash. Using a one-way hash is important because if anyone is able to acquire the hashed value, then they can not reverse the algorithm to determine the original password. The problem these days is that the MD5 hashing algorithm is so widely used that attackers have dictionaries of the hashes of the most common passwords. So, if they are able to get access to a list of hashes, they are then able to lookup the plain text that creates that hash. 
  For my enhancement, I chose to modify the hashing algorithm used by my application. Instead of the more common MD5, I updated it to use the SHA256 which is a 32 byte (256-bit) one-way hashing algorithm. This is a little more secure because of the increase in the size of the returned hash. 
  Simply changing the code, however, is not sufficient for the enhancement because if the application generates a SHA256 and tries to compare it to the stored MD5 hash, it will never find a matching password. So, I had to also update the credentials file and change all the MD5 hashes to the equivalent SHA256 hash and then the authentication still worked.

### Databases
  While working in my current position as a software developer, I have become very familiar with using databases to store and manipulate data in the back end of an application. The third category in which we were supposed to enhance the original application is the use of databases. The original authentication system I wrote in IT-145 did not contain a database back end. Instead, the application validated user input using a text file containing the valid credentials. For this enhancement, I wanted to keep everything in a database to improve security and functionality. 
  I developed a database to do just that. I used Microsoft SQL Server because that is the RDBMS with which I am most familiar. I created a new database with two tables. One table contains the valid credentials including the username and the new SHA256 hashes for the passwords. Along with those values for each valid credential, I also keep track of the number of failed attempts as well as a bit to indicate if the account is locked or not. It’s also worth noting that I do not store the plain text value for the password anywhere in my database. 
  The second table I created contains the role data including the greeting and the description of the authorized tasks. Then in the credentials table, I link a credential to the appropriate role.
  Additionally, I developed a couple stored procedures to help operate on the tables that I created. There is a stored procedure that I use to authenticate a user. It takes a username and hash that will be supplied by the application and looks for a matching record that is not locked in the database. If a match is found, it returns the appropriate role information retrieved from the linked table. Otherwise, it returns a failed result. I also wrote a stored procedure that will unlock an account. This makes the application easier to work with for the purposes of education and testing. Instead of having to go into the database and manually adjust the data, I can call a procedure firectly from the application to do that for me.
  After developing the backend database, I needed to interface with the database from the application. To do that, I adjusted my validate action to reach out to the database instead of reading the file. I also added another action linked to a second button on the screen to execute the database procedure to unlock a user account. And finally, I added the database connection string into the configuration file for the application so that the app knows where to locate the database to use for validation. 
  I decided to do it this way because it makes for a more maintainable application. If the database connection changes at all, then I can just modify the configuration file and restart the application rather than changing code and having to recompile. When testing the functionality of the application, it works as expected. None of the functionality from before is lost and now, the database will keep track of which accounts are locked. So, if user A exceeds 3 failed attempts, the application doesn’t close and user B can still attempt to log in to the system.
